PBTS: new system model and problem statement (#375)
tendermint/spec: spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp/pbts-sysmodel_002_draft.md

external and trusted source of the time (e.g. NTP servers).
Each synchronization cycle aligns the process local clock with the external
source of time, making it a *fairly accurate* source of real time.
The periodic (re)synchronization aims to correct the *drift* of local clocks,
which tend to pace slightly faster or slower than the real time.

To avoid an excessive level detail in the parameters and guarantees of
synchronized clocks, we adopt a single system parameter `PRECISION` to 
encapsulate the potential inaccuracy of the synchronization mechanisms,
and drifts of local clocks from real time.

#### **[PBTS-CLOCK-PRECISION.0]**

There exists a system parameter `PRECISION`, such that
for any two processes `p` and `q`, with local clocks `C_p` and `C_q`,
that read their local clocks at the same real-time `t`,  we have:

- If `p` and `q` are equipped with synchronized clocks, then `|C_p(t) - C_q(t)| < PRECISION`

`PRECISION` thus bounds the difference on the times simultaneously read by processes
from their local clocks, so that their clocks can be considered synchronized.

#### Accuracy

The [previous system model][v1] included a second clock-related parameter, `ACCURACY`,

> that relates the values read by processes from their synchronized clocks with the real time.

Reviewer: I think that this implies a relationship between the synchronized clock (ntp in this case) and the 'real' time. Should we make that somewhat explicit in this document?

Author: Accuracy is between clock readings and real time. We try to improve accuracy of the local clock by synchronizing it with a more accurate clock. By synchronizing here we mean trying to reduce (so, to improve) at most the precision between the local clock and the reference clock. As a result, our local clock accuracy will be the accuracy of the reference clock plus (so, reduced by) the precision achieved in the synchronization process.

This parameter was removed in this version for two reasons:

- Clock accuracy is hard, if possible at all, to assess in distributed systems
- The adoption of an `ACCURACY` parameter renders the `PRECISION` parameter redundant:
if the accuracy of processes clocks is bound by `ACCURACY`,
then the clocks precision must be bound by `2 * ACCURACY`.

The adoption of an `ACCURACY` was intended to formalize the relation between a block time and the real time.
We observe, however, that clients will compare the block time to their local time,

> or to the time they retrieve from a trusted source of time, not to a physical clock.

Reviewer: > not to a physical clock

I'm not totally sure I understand what this phrase means since their local time is generated from a physical clock. I think this sentence is attempting to describe the fact that processes local clocks are not perfectly accurate, is that roughly correct?

Author: I don't like this description either. I will try to fix it.

Author: Please take a look on the new version.

The restriction imposed by the `PRECISION` parameter can then be used, indirectly,

> to bound the difference block times and real time.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to be more explicit about "can then be used, indirectly".

defining a lower bound, a *minimum time* that a correct process assigns to proposal.
While *minimum delay* for delivering a proposal to a destination allows defining
an upper bound, the *maximum time* assigned to a proposal.

#### **[PBTS-MSG-D.0]**

There exists a system parameter `MSGDELAY` for end-to-end delays of messages carrying proposals,
such for any two correct processes `p` and `q`, and any real time `t`:

- If `p` sends a message `m` carrying a proposal at time `ts`,
then if `q` receives the message and learns the proposal,
`q` does that at time `t` such that `ts <= t <= ts + MSGDELAY`.

While we don't want to impose particular restrictions regarding the format of `m`,
we need to assume that their size is upper bounded.
In practice, using messages with a fixed-size to carry proposals allows
for a more accurate estimation of `MSGDELAY`, and therefore is advised.

## Problem Statement

In this section we define the properties of Tendermint consensus
(cf. the [arXiv paper][arXiv]) in this new system model.

#### **[PBTS-PROPOSE.0]**

A proposer proposes a consensus value `v` with an associated proposal time `v.time`.

#### **[PBTS-INV-AGREEMENT.0]**

> [Agreement] No two correct processes decide on different values `v` or proposal times `v.time`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Agreement] No two correct processes decide on different values `v`. (This implies that no two correct processes decide on different proposal times `v.time`.)
```

#### **[PBTS-INV-VALID.0]**

[Validity] If a correct process decides on value `v`,
then `v` satisfies a predefined `valid` predicate.

#### **[PBTS-INV-TIMELY.0]**

[Time-Validity] If a correct process decides on value `v`,
then the associated proposal time `v.time` satisfies a predefined `timely` predicate.

> Both [Validity] and [Time-Validity] must be observed even if up to `2f` validators are faulty.

### Timely proposals

The `timely` predicate is evaluated when a process receives a proposal.
Let `now_p` be time a process `p` reads from its local clock when `p` receives a proposal.
Let `v` be the proposed value and `v.time` the proposal time.
The proposal is considered `timely` by `p` if:

1. `now_p >= v.time - PRECISION` and
1. `now_p <= v.time + MSGDELAY + PRECISION`

> ### Timely Proof-of-Locks

Reviewer 2: If I understand the structure of the document correctly, the following text is about analysis / correctness arguments. If this is right, perhaps we should add a header making this more explicit.

Author: A TLA+-related header?

Reviewer 2: Not sure that it is TLA+ related. I guess the point is just that the following text is more interesting when one wants to understand correctness (rather than protocol details). Perhaps we can discuss this synchronously.

Author: I've added some headers to the latest version.
